JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President-elect Trump taps
ExxonMobil executive
Rex Tillerson for secretary of
state, raising
concerns even among Republicans
about the
pick's past connections to
Russia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday:
A nightmare continues, the
Syrian government's
deadly takeover of the
war-ravaged city of
Aleppo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And an artist's
take on how
to look at art, offering a
simple way to enjoy
a museum.
DAVID SALLE, Author, "How to
See": It's not
that different from having a
conversation
with someone.
The painter is telling you
something.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another big seat
is filled
in the Trump Cabinet-to-be, and
it sets up
a potential confirmation fight.
The president-elect's transition
team confirmed
this morning that a top oil
executive is the
choice for secretary of state.
After days of speculation,
official word of
the Rex Tillerson pick came
before sunrise,
followed by praise from the vice
president-elect.
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice
President-Elect: We just
could not be more grateful that
someone of
Rex Tillerson's proven
leadership and accomplishments
has been willing to step forward
to serve
our nation as our next secretary
of state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tillerson, a
native Texan,
is currently CEO of oil giant
ExxonMobil,
among the world's largest
publicly traded
companies.
He rose through the ranks over
four decades,
and, as chief executive, he's
expanded ExxonMobil's
business overseas, including its
operations
in Russia.
In a 2013 interview with Charlie
rose for
CBS News, Tillerson made clear
his company
will go wherever there's oil.
REX TILLERSON, Chairman & CEO,
ExxonMobil:
My philosophy is to make money.
And so if I can drill and make
money, then
that's what I want to do.
But it really is -- for us, it's
about making
quality investments for our
shareholders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To that end,
ExxonMobil began
working closely with the Russian
state-owned
oil giant Rosneft.
That, in turn, brought Tillerson
into close
contact with Russian President
Vladimir Putin.
Since then, he's received the
Russian Order
of Friendship, and he's said he
opposes U.S.
and European sanctions against
Russia over
its intervention in Ukraine.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell today
highlighted Tillerson's
experience, and said
he looks forward to supporting
his nomination.
But the top Democrat on the
Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, Ben Cardin,
said he is
deeply troubled by Tillerson's
vocal opposition
to sanctions on Russia, and
Republican Senator
Marco Rubio voiced serious
concerns about
the planned nomination.
There's also word that another
Texan, former
Governor Rick Perry, could be
tapped to be
energy secretary.
But the transition at Energy
could be rocky.
The department said today that
it will not
provide the names of employees
who've worked
on climate change, as the Trump
transition
team requested.
There are also reports that
Montana Congressman
Ryan Zinke could be tapped for
interior secretary.
Meanwhile, President Obama
criticized Mr.
Trump's lack of interest in
receiving a daily
intelligence briefing.
He spoke last night on "The
Daily Show."
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It doesn't matter how smart you
are.
You have to have the best
information possible
to make the best decisions
possible.
And if you're not getting their
perspective,
their detailed perspective, then
you are flying
blind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back at Trump
Tower today,
the president-elect met with
Microsoft billionaire
Bill Gates.
BILL GATES, Founder, Microsoft:
We had a good
conversation about innovation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Others he met
with, pro football
greats Jim Brown and Ray Lewis
and entertainer
Kanye West.
Tonight, Mr. Trump is making the
latest stop
on what he's calling his thank
you tour, this
time in Wisconsin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The Environmental Protection
Agency released
a long-awaited report on the
effects of hydraulic
fracturing, or fracking, on
drinking water.
It found the oil and gas
drilling technique
can contaminate underground
water in some
cases.
It also said there is not
evidence to estimate
the severity of the risk.
The report dropped an earlier
finding that
fracking has not caused
widespread systemic
harm to water supplies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ohio's Republican
Governor
John Kasich has vetoed a closely
watched anti-abortion
bill.
He rejected a measure today that
banned abortion
once the first fetal heartbeat
is detected.
He said federal courts have
already struck
down similar laws elsewhere.
Kasich, however, did sign a
separate bill
banning abortion after 20 weeks
of pregnancy.
Seventeen states already have
similar laws.
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama today signed
a sweeping law, including new
spending on
cancer research and drug abuse.
The 21st Century Cures Act
provides more than
$6 billion.
It also streamlines the process
for approving
drugs and medical devices.
Mr. Obama spoke before signing
the bill at
a White House ceremony with
lawmakers and
Vice President Biden.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We are bringing to reality the
possibility
of new breakthroughs to some of
the greatest
health challenges of our time.
I'm confident that it will lead
to better
years and better lives for
millions of Americans,
the work that you have done.
That's what we got sent here
for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The new law
also includes
funding for mental health.
We will explore that later in
the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Russia,
opposition political
leader Alexei Navalny announced
that he will
run for president in 2018.
The anti-corruption activist
aims to challenge
President Vladimir Putin, who is
expected
to seek a fourth term.
Navalny is currently on trial
for fraud in
a case that he says is
politically motivated.
If he is convicted, he would be
barred from
running.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A railway
strike across
Southern England today caused
the worst railway
disruption there in 20 years.
It is part of a longstanding
dispute over
whether train drivers or
on-board guards should
close train doors.
The drivers went on strike today
for 48 hours,
leaving hundreds of thousands of
commuters
stranded or delayed and angry,
but union officials
defended their stance.
MAN: It's a safety issue.
The reality for us is that the
increasing
level of trains, the increasing
amount of
footfall in the 21st century, we
don't believe
that the technology or the make
do and mend
on our important infrastructure
lends itself
to a one-man operation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The government
blamed the
unions for the impasse.
The railway owner announced new
talks for
tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another day,
another rally
on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained more
than 114 points to close at a
record 19911.
The Nasdaq rose 51, and the S&P
500 added
14.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the oldest
person in
America is another year older,
but don't tell
her that.
Adele Dunlap of Pittstown, New
Jersey, turned
114 yesterday.
She said she is 105, but her
family said she
always shaves about a decade off
her age.
Either way, people at her
nursing home gave
her balloons and sang happy
birthday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I think she
should have
the right to say whatever age it
is.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
how Exxon's CEO could shape
foreign policy
as secretary of state; Syrians
facing an onslaught
from government forces in Aleppo
record their
final goodbyes; where American
students rank
compared to their peers around
the globe;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a post first
officially
held by Thomas Jefferson.
The secretary of state is
America's top diplomat.
Today, president-elect Trump
tapped the CEO
of the world's largest publicly
traded oil
and gas company for the job.
So, who is Rex Tillerson, and
what does the
pick tell us about the Trump
agenda?
We're joined now by John Hamre.
He is the president and CEO of
the Center
for Strategic and International
Studies, a
thank tank in Washington, D.C.,
where Tillerson
is a member of the board of
trustees.
Hamre served as deputy secretary
of defense
during the Clinton
administration.
Nicholas Burns was a career
diplomat and former
U.S. ambassador to NATO.
He's now a professor at Harvard
University.
And Steve Coll is the author
"Private Empire:
ExxonMobil and American Power."
He's also a staff writer for
"The New Yorker"
magazine and the dean of the
School of Journalism
at Columbia University.
Welcome, all three of you, back
to the program.
Steve Coll, to you first.
You wrote in The New Yorker this
weekend that
Mr. Tillerson's life, you said,
has been shaped
by to institutions, the Boy
Scouts and ExxonMobil,
a company you describe as
ruthless and unusually
aggressive.
Is that a contradiction?
STEVE COLL, Dean, Columbia
University Graduate
School of Journalism: No.
I think he comes from the
standard oil tradition
of ruthless business competition
rooted in
strong, strong values and a kind
of adherence
to the rule of law, modeled by
John D. Rockefeller,
the original founder of Standard
Oil.
I think the most important part
of his career
is that it's all been at one
place, 40 years
at ExxonMobil.
Now that he's been nominated for
secretary
of state, we really don't have
any record
of his views about America's
place in the
world.
We only have a record of his
views about ExxonMobil's
place in the world, which is
different, I
hope.
And so there's a whole series of
questions
now in front of us.
What does he think about
promoting human rights?
promoting democracy?
These are not -- is he worried
about Russia's
influence in Europe?
These are not questions that
he's had to address,
and that makes him a very
unusual nominee
for secretary.
Typically, even nominees who
have come and
gone from industry have built up
a record
of views about these fundamental
questions
of foreign policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Hamre, as we
said, you
know Rex Tillerson, having
served on your
board at the Center for
Strategic and International
Studies.
What is your understanding of
his view of
the United States' role in the
world?
JOHN HAMRE, President and CEO,
Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Well,
I have known Rex well.
I have known him for 11 years.
He's been a very active member
of our board.
He's always engaged
substantively in our discussions
about foreign policy.
He's remarkably insightful.
He has more experience as a CEO
than most
political figures in Washington.
He's able to lead conversations
in front of
some of the most impressive
people of our
history in foreign policy,
people like Henry
Kissinger and Zbigniew
Brzezinski.
He fits squarely in the
tradition of American
realism, a pragmatic, centrist
realism.
He sees the leadership of
America as shaping
a better world.
He actively believes strongly in
American
values, due process, rule of
law.
But he's also very pragmatic.
He wants to know what other
people think.
He listens carefully.
That's one of the most important
qualities,
he listens so well.
So you're going to find a very
fine secretary
in Rex Tillerson.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nicholas Burns,
based on what
you know of Rex Tillerson, what
do you know
and what are your concerns?
NICHOLAS BURNS, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
Well, he's
an impressive man, by all
accounts.
And he's run our largest
corporations.
He has had significant
managerial and international
experience as a negotiator.
That is going to stand him in
good stead.
He was endorsed today publicly,
very strongly,
by former Secretary of Defense
Bob Gates,
Former Secretary of State Condi
Rice.
I admire both of those people.
Those are serious
recommendations.
But, Judy, I think there is
going to be a
real challenge to his
nomination, and that's
his closeness to the Russian
regime and what
he's been saying about Russian
policy.
And I think the backdrop here to
his Senate
confirmation will be the
extraordinary statements
made by Donald Trump about
Russia during the
campaign.
I don't think we have had in 70
years a presidential
candidate, and now a
president-elect, so
accommodating
to Russia.
No criticism by Donald Trump
about Russia's
illegal annexation of Crimea.
No criticism about Russia's
division of the
Donbass of Ukraine.
No criticism of Russia's
harassment of our
NATO allies, Poland and the
Baltic states.
And no criticism of this
barbaric Russian
bombing of the civilian
population of Aleppo.
A lot of people feel we should
be containing
Putin, and there's a great
concern that Donald
Trump and General Flynn, the new
national
security adviser, and perhaps
Mr. Tillerson
-- we don't know yet -- he has a
right to
speak on behalf of his own views
-- that this
administration will be too
tilted to make
excuses for Putin.
We might have a weak policy.
That's where I think the
senators are going
to focus in January.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's hard
to know what
Donald Trump believes, but,
Steve Coll, based
on your reporting of Rex
Tillerson and ExxonMobil,
what do you see as his attitude
towards Russia?
We know he's grown close to
Vladimir Putin.
He's received an award from him.
STEVE COLL: Well, he's been an
effective negotiator
on behalf of the shareholders of
ExxonMobil,
but now he's being asked to
think about Russia
it in an entirely different way.
And I agree completely with
Ambassador Burns'
critique.
This is a very dangerous moment
in Europe.
And part of the reason is
because Putin has
been pushing the boundaries of
Western tolerance.
Also, Trump's election is part
of a wave of
populism and the strengthening
of authoritarian
regimes around the world that is
really going
to challenge the United States
and its values.
I worry about Russia.
I also worry about the global
human rights
movement.
You know, right around the world
today, there
are human rights activists,
democracy activists,
civil society activists that
have traditionally
relied on the secretary of
state's voice speaking
up for them when they're under
pressure.
And the State Department pushes
a lot of funding,
including into authoritarian
regimes, to support
this kind of activity, human
rights research
and democracy organizations.
So, where is Mr. Tillerson on
these issues?
I have no idea.
He has spent 40 years managing
ExxonMobil's
place in the world, and it will
be very important
to hear him speak forthrightly,
because he's
now, after the president, going
to be the
most important voice on behalf
of American
values in the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Hamre, you
described Rex
Tillerson as a centrist.
What do you know about him that
would assuage
some of these concerns, first
about Russia?
JOHN HAMRE: Well, I will agree
with what both
Nick and Steve have said that we
face a very
challenging time with Russia.
Boy, that's why I'm so glad that
Rex is there,
because he knows them so well.
I mean, knowing someone and
agreeing with
someone are two completely
different things.
Rex does know Russia very well.
He knows President Putin very
well.
He knows the dynamics within
Russia very well.
Of course he's going to have to
lay out his
thinking during his nomination
hearing.
I'm not at all worried that Rex
is going to
stand up for America or American
values.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Nicholas
Burns, I want
to ask you to respond to that,
but also move
on to Iran, because there have
been questions
raised about what Rex Tillerson
would do with
regard to U.S. posture toward
Iran, and the
nuclear -- the nuclear deal.
NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, I do agree
with John
that Rex Tillerson's track
record is very
encouraging as a centrist, as a
pragmatic
person, and as a real leader of
a big, complex
organization.
I think those are all in good
stead.
My questions aren't about him.
They're about the
president-elect and his
extraordinary statements.
And, Judy, on Iran, Donald Trump
has been
saying that -- this is the
nuclear deal that
President Obama negotiated is
the worst deal
in the history of the world.
It's going to be very difficult
for a Trump
administration to disengage the
United States
from the nuclear deal, because,
if we do that,
I'm convinced that Germany,
France, and Britain
will not walk out with us.
They want to see this deal
through.
And if we walk out, then, of
course, Iran
would already have received
sanctions relief,
but Iran then could walk away on
its own and
go back to resuming its nuclear
program.
I think that's a very bad
outcome.
And I think a smart decision --
and you will
have pragmatic people like
General Mattis
at Defense and Rex Tillerson at
State to tell
the president-elect that a smart
decision
is going to be to stay with the
nuclear deal,
but try to limit Iranian
behavior in the Sunni
world, and support those
countries that are
victims of Iranian aggression.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steve Coll,
quickly, is there
something you can shed -- that
would shed
light on Rex Tillerson and his
posture toward
Iran from your reporting?
STEVE COLL: Well, he has been
realistic in
seeking stability in the Middle
East.
He has advocated for a world
that is managed,
rather than disrupted.
He is skeptical about sanctions,
though his
allies have clarified in the
last few days
that he's more worried about
enforcing them
than imposing them, but they are
a very important
instrument of American foreign
policy that
he has often advocated against.
Now, in his public role, he may
have to clarify
his views about that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, quickly,
again, John Hamre,
and just finally, if we look to
Russ Tillerson
-- I'm sorry -- to Rex Tillerson
in terms
of U.S. policy towards Iran,
toward Russia
overall, what should Americans
think?
Is this a man who is going to do
exactly what
Donald Trump wants, or will he
speak up to
Donald Trump when he disagrees
with him?
JOHN HAMRE: Well, I have no
doubt that Rex
Tillerson will give his private
counsel to
the president, president-elect,
in a very
direct manner.
I think he will be quite
influential, frankly,
with the president-elect.
He's not a man who is shy of
sharing his views
once he has reached them.
We really don't need to worry
about Rex Tillerson.
I promise you.
This is a man of great
character.
And he is going to have a
challenging environment
in this administration.
He will do well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Hamre,
Nicholas Burns,
Steve Coll, we thank you all.
NICHOLAS BURNS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The years-long
battle for
control of Syria's largest city,
Aleppo, is
over.
A punishing bombardment by
Syrian and Russian
jets and deadly ground
operations brought
an end to the siege of the last
rebel areas
of the city.
It's a major turning point in
the brutal half-decade
war.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: After four
years of fighting,
the end is at hand in Eastern
Aleppo.
Word came late today of
agreement on a cease-fire
and evacuation from the
shattered city.
BRITA HAGI HASAN, President,
East Aleppo Local
Council (through translator):
The agreement
includes the groups of fighters
and the civilians,
but my heart is full of pain,
full of emotion
for having to ask for a complete
evacuation
of all civilians.
MARGARET WARNER: In addition,
Russian officials
announced joint military
operations with the
Syrians against rebel-held
Eastern Aleppo
have also ended.
Anne Barnard, who has been
covering the Syrian
conflict for The New York Times
Syria and
from Beirut, said the cease-fire
assures rebels
and civilians they will be
evacuated to a
safe place.
ANNE BARNARD, Beirut Bureau
Chief, The New
York Times: The plan is for them
to go to
other rebel-held areas, which
had been a demand
of the civilians and rebels
there because
they were afraid that if they
went to the
government side, as tens of
thousands of people
have done, they would be
arrested or face
other reprisals.
Inside the government-held
districts of the
city, life was going on more or
less as normal,
but there was the constant
danger of shelling
from the rebel side.
MARGARET WARNER: In
government-held West Aleppo,
there was jubilation.
But in the East, thousands of
civilians are
already fleeing, and there are
reports are
mass killings by government
forces and their
allies pouring into the city.
U.N. officials say more than 80
people were
executed in a single
neighborhood, many of
them women and children.
Other reports told of dozens of
children trapped
in a building under attack.
Overnight, activists in the city
posted grim
goodbyes on social media.
WOMAN: We are here exposed to a
genocide in
the besieged city of Aleppo.
This may be my last video.
MAN: We were a free people.
We wanted freedom.
We didn't want anything else but
freedom.
MARGARET WARNER: The fall of
Eastern Aleppo
marks a watershed in the
five-year Syrian
civil war.
Opposition forces first took
part of the city
in 2012.
They prevailed for years, until
October 2015,
when Russia stepped in to
bolster the Syrian
military with punishing air
assaults.
When cease-fire talks brokered
by the United
States collapsed last month, the
onslaught
intensified.
At the U.N. today, U.S.
Ambassador Samantha
Power put the onus on Russia and
Syria.
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations: Is there no act of
barbarism against
civilians, no execution of a
child that gets
under your skin, that just
creeps you out
a little bit?
Is there nothing you will not
lie about or
justify?
MARGARET WARNER: Even the fall
of Aleppo will
not mean an end to the Syrian
war.
President Bashar al-Assad has
vowed to crush
the resistance to his rule
throughout the
entire country.
Rebel forces still operating in
Northern Syria
are bracing for an assault by
government troops.
The chief Syrian opposition
coordinator insists
the loss of Aleppo will not make
them give
up.
RIAD HIJAB, Chief Syrian
Opposition Coordinator
(through translator): If Assad
and his allies
think that a military advance in
certain quarters
of Aleppo signifies that we will
make concessions
on the goals of the revolution,
that will
not happen.
MARGARET WARNER: Meanwhile,
Islamic State
fighters took advantage of the
government's
focus on Aleppo this week to
recapture the
ancient Syrian city of Palmyra.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, a group
of scholars
and Middle East experts met at
Rice University's
James Baker Institute of Public
Policy in
Houston to discuss options for
the new Trump
administration of a region once
again transformed
by the fall of Aleppo.
Two of those experts join me
now, Randa Slim
of the Middle East Institute,
and Joshua Landis
of the University of Oklahoma.
Randa, let me start with you.
What does this mean now that
military operations
are over in Eastern Aleppo?
RANDA SLIM, Middle East
Institute: Well, it
means this phase of the conflict
is over,
but, as the Syrian officials
have themselves
declared, the war is far from
over.
What also this win -- and it is
a win for
the regime, political and
military win -- means
is, it spells the end of the
negotiation process.
Until now, Assad has paid lip
service to the
idea of negotiations and
political process
to end the civil war in Syria.
And I think now he's going to be
definitely
dead set against it, because he
will look
at this as, you know, winning,
winning this
war, and that there's no need
for him to make
the necessary concessions to
make the political
negotiation successful,
including, you know,
transitioning out of power,
which is one of
the premise of the political
negotiations
started in Geneva.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Joshua Landis,
what's the
impact of the end of this battle
vs. the end
of the war?
JOSHUA LANDIS, University of
Oklahoma: Well,
the center of gravity for
opposition now shifts
to Idlib province and Idlib
city.
That city is dominated by the
al-Qaida wing
of the opposition and other
Salafist forces.
The United States and the West
cannot support
those Salafists and al-Qaida.
It means that the rebels are
going to have
a very hard time getting
significant amounts
of support.
And it also means on a larger
scale that a
new security architecture is
being laid down
in the Northern Middle East,
Lebanon, Syria,
Iraq, in which pro-Iranian
governments are
consolidating their grip on the
territory
and they're backed by Russia, to
a large degree.
And this has caused great grief
and consternation
in Saudi Arabia and amongst many
of the United
States' allies, Israel, the Gulf
countries,
Turkey, because they see this
new architecture
of security and Iranian
influence and Russian
influence as something that's
very bad for
them.
And the United States' course is
being pulled
in to try to counter that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Randa Slim, as
Josh just
mentioned, there are so many
different actors
here.
Let's take them kind of one at a
time.
What happens to the rebels now
after this
military setback?
RANDA SLIM: I think they have --
they are
in for some serious evaluation
of their tactics
and of, you know, what they have
achieved
and why they have failed until
now, I mean,
given the odds they were facing.
Part of them definitely will buy
into this
idea that, you know, extremism
is the way
to go.
And so the win in Aleppo will
fuel the narrative
of groups like al-Qaida.
And you will see more people
maybe being attracted
to this idea.
But, also, I think there will be
a group of
the rebels that need to focus on
shifting
strategy away from holding
territory, and
because they cannot do that, you
know, when
faced with the -- with the
aggression from
the Syrian regime and from the
Russian forces,
and shift that would -- becoming
an insurgency,
and employing tactics to defeat
these forces
in a way that make them viable
in this battle.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Joshua Landis,
what about
ISIS and al-Qaida that almost
seem forgotten
in this giant proxy war?
What happens?
Is ISIS taking advantage of this
opportunity,
as Margaret Warner reported?
JOSHUA LANDIS: Yes, ISIS did.
We saw that, as Syrian troops
went to Aleppo,
ISIS took Palmyra.
But ISIS' days are numbered.
The Trump administration has
said that they're
going to concentrate on ISIS and
they're going
to work with Russia.
Now, we don't know whether they
really will
work with Russia or not, but
it's clear that
ISIS is going to be pounded.
Who is going to benefit from
that?
It's quite clear the Syrian
regime in Syria,
as the Iraqi regime in Iraq is
benefiting
from America's effort to destroy
those opposition
forces in both countries.
And there aren't any other rebel
forces that
one can foresee on the horizon
that will be
able to take Eastern Syria
that's now occupied
by ISIS.
But the Syrian government will
be there.
It's weak today, but it's been
gathering strength.
And I think it's likely that, in
the next
few years, you will see the
Syrian government
retake much of Syria.
Now, this is disputed amongst
experts.
There are a lot of people here
today at our
conference who think that that's
not likely
to happen, that there may be
enclaves and
so forth.
But I think the Assad regime is
on a roll.
I think it's got the backing of
Russia and
Iran and Hezbollah.
And it's hard to see who is
going to stand
in their way in this steady
fight against
the insurgents.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Randa Slim,
what happens
to U.S. support, considering
that there is
this shift in momentum
militarily?
What happens to the aid that
we're giving
to these rebels?
RANDA SLIM: Look, I mean, we
have now a new
administration that's going to
take power
in January.
And we already have heard from
Mr. Trump during
the campaign that the priority
of his administration
will be focusing on fighting
ISIS, and that
he's against nation-building,
against regime
change.
So, I'm going -- I would expect
us to move
into some kind of a security
dialogue with
the Russians about what to do in
Syria.
However, the Russians have the
baggage.
And that's Iranian baggage
they're going to
bring with them with any kind of
dialogue
with Americans.
And you have already this
contradiction between
an American administration that
wants to engage
with the Russians, but also an
American administration
that sees Iran as a great
threat.
And so the question is how
you're going to
square these two contradictory,
in a way,
positions and attitudes as you
enter into
a security dialogue with the
Russians.
But when it comes to the support
of our allies
-- and, primarily, the main ally
has been
the Kurds -- I see the
possibility, as a result
of this American-Russian
security dialogue,
I see the possibility of the
Kurds -- of a
deal, in a way, being struck, at
the expense
of the Kurds in Northern Syria.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Joshua Landis,
are the Kurds
the ones that get squeezed out
in this process,
where they have to have the
support of the
U.S. to continue on, but, at the
same time,
Turkey wants nothing to do in
any close independence
of theirs?
JOSHUA LANDIS: Well, I do
believe that the
Kurds are in a difficult
situation.
They do have some American
support.
How consistent that will be is
unclear.
But they have built up a strong
military,
and they have begun to build the
institutions
of an autonomous life in
Northern Syria.
Turkey's enmity towards the
Kurds and their
desire to make sure there is no
independent
Kurdish state or even really
autonomous enclave
is going to push the Kurds into
Assad's hands
over time.
They're going to have to strike
a bargain
with Assad that will keep them
in the Syrian
state and under some kind of
Syrian authority,
so that they can have the
protection of international
legitimacy and the Syrian army
against the
Turks.
How much -- how they can bargain
with Assad
is unclear.
What kind of negotiations they
can come to,
unclear.
We will see whether they get
something like
the Kurds in Iraq, which is a
large measure
of autonomy, or something less
than that.
That will be one of the big
negotiations to
come out of this process.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Joshua Landis,
Randa Slim, thank you both.
JOSHUA LANDIS: Pleasure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have more
online.
Before Aleppo was devastated by
war, the city
was a thriving hub with a proud
history dating
back millennia.
Find images from before and
after the destruction
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new law to
bolster the United States'
mental health system;
and learning to see art with an
artist's eye.
But first: International tests
are one way
of gauging how American kids are
doing in
school compared with other
countries.
Traditionally, the U.S.
performance has been
described as mediocre, and this
year was no
different.
The most recent test scores show
the U.S.
is stagnant in reading and
science.
In math, our country ranks
toward the bottom
of developed nations.
What these results tell us about
educational
priorities around the world is a
bit more
nuanced.
Special correspondent Kavitha
Cardoza with
our partner Education Week met
with international
students to ask them first-hand
about the
differences.
It's part of our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Calvin Leong
loves soccer.
CALVIN LEONG, Student: I started
soccer really
young.
And I just can't stop playing
soccer because
it's really fun.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Two years ago,
Calvin and
his family moved to the U.S.
because of his
father's work.
His mother Margaret, says if he
was still
living in his home country, Hong
Kong, just
like his former classmates,
Calvin would have
had to give up soccer.
MARGARET TSANG, Mother of
Calvin: Calvin's
friends in Hong Kong have to
give up playing
soccer because they have to
focus and concentrate
in their studying.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She says there
are only a
few universities in Hong Kong,
so competition
is fierce.
MARGARET TSANG: That's why
parents would like
them to have extra lessons, even
after school
for almost six hours.
So, I think they can balance
studying and
extracurricular activities here.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Other countries
have, at
times, wrestled with that lack
of balance,
and some have even turned to
high-performing
U.S. schools for lessons in
building student
skills, such as creativity and
collaboration.
But, academically, when Calvin
moved here,
he found general classes much
easier in the
U.S.
CALVIN LEONG: In Hong Kong,
math-wise, it's
definitely super competitive and
everyone,
like, move in the same pace.
So it's pretty hard to catch up
if you fall
behind.
But, in America, you can choose
your own pace.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Calvin loves
the diversity
of U.S. schools and says he's
made lots of
friends, even if many of them
don't know where
he's from.
CALVIN LEONG: When people ask me
about Hong
Kong, I connect Hong Kong with
the Hollywood
movies they saw like the
"Transformers" and
the "Batman."
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Hong Kong is
also known for
being a place that does very
well on international
tests, unlike the U.S., where
the academic
performance this year was
lackluster.
The U.S. ranks in the middle of
the pack when
it comes to reading and science.
In math, it ranked 31st out of
35 countries.
The PISA test is taken every
three years by
15-year-olds from dozens of
countries.
What makes this test interesting
is that it
doesn't gauge what students can
memorize,
in other words, what you can
Google.
The PISA test looks to see what
students can
do with what they know.
WOMAN: They are asked to
interpret texts,
solve mathematics problems.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Andreas
Schleicher oversees
the PISA test.
He says the school systems of
today are the
economies of tomorrow.
ANDREAS SCHLEICHER, PISA Test:
You look at
a country like Korea in the
1960s.
Korea had the level of the
economic development
of Afghanistan today, one of the
least developed
education systems.
But it got education right.
It became one of its most
successful economies.
The power of education to
transform societies
and generate both economic and
social outcomes
is just tremendous.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Economic
prosperity, international
competitiveness, national
security, those
are a few of the reasons
countries take education
and, by extension, these
rankings so seriously.
As President Obama said back in
2009, countries
that out-educate us will
outperform us.
The U.S. spends markedly more
money compared
to other developed countries on
education,
but, by high school, American
students fall
behind.
Schleicher says it's not about
how much a
country spends on education, but
how it spends
the money.
He says, in other countries,
it's all about
teacher quality.
ANDREAS SCHLEICHER: And I'm not
only talking
about making teaching
financially more attractive.
I'm also talking about making
teaching intellectually
more attractive.
And that's probably where the
United States
is furthest away from some of
the highest-performing
education systems, where you
really have a
much greater investment in the
quality of
teaching.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: U.S. Secretary
of Education
John King has one word for the
results.
JOHN KING, U.S. Education
Secretary: I would
say that we are disappointed.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: King says the
Obama administration
has championed educational best
practices,
for example, an emphasis on
teacher quality
and early education.
Many states have also adopted
the Common Core,
which sets high standards of
what children
should know at each grade.
But, he says:
JOHN KING: One of the challenges
in our system,
different from many of our
international competitors,
is that it is a highly
decentralized system,
so change takes a particularly
long time.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: A lot of people
say, you
know, it's not fair to look at
these results
and compare us to other
countries which are
more homogeneous.
JOHN KING: Sure, we have to be
cautious about
these results.
At the same time, we can look at
a country
like Canada that's had a very
large influx
of immigrants over the last few
years and
is doing better.
We can look at countries around
the world
like Poland, which is a country
that has significant
population of low-income
students, and yet
they have made a lot of progress
over the
last decade.
And we should ask why.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Julia Kempster
and her family
moved from New Zealand to
Maryland earlier
this year.
She gets asked a lot of
questions from classmates.
JULIA KEMPSTER, Student: Can you
talk for
me?
Can you say the number 10 for
Is it true that there's one
person to every
65 sheep?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: School is very
different
in the U.S., more students, more
tests.
But the biggest difference,
Julia says, is,
in New Zealand, she had to
interpret and analyze
information a lot more.
JULIA KEMPSTER: Here, it's like
you get everything
from the book.
It's like the facts are the
facts.
And there's lots of dates you
have to memorize,
because everything is very
important.
And it's not a lot about what
you think, but
what's in the book.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Despite the
differences,
Julia's a typical teenager.
She loves the social aspect of
her U.S. school.
JULIA KEMPSTER: In America,
like, you have
a lot of dances and social
things you get
to go to, which is very fun.
You get to do, obviously, like
homecoming
and everything like that.
Yes, it's fun.
TOM LOVELESS, Brookings
Institution: American
high schools place a huge
emphasis on the
social life of teenagers.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: And that's part
of the problem,
says Tom Loveless with the
Brookings Institution.
He says homecoming, prom,
rallies may help
teach teamwork and creativity,
but don't improve
academics.
He says we need to look at the
role culture
plays in reinforcing education.
Loveless surveyed almost 400
foreign exchange
students who spent a year in an
American high
school, and asked them about the
relative
importance given to math and
sports.
TOM LOVELESS: I asked them,
among your friends,
among your peer groups, how
important is it
to be successful at mathematics?
And they said, well -- the
foreign exchanges
said, well, back home, it's
fairly important
whether or not you're good at
mathematics.
In the United States, not so
much.
And then I asked them about
sports.
How important is it to be a good
athlete?
And with both boys and girls,
and no matter
from what country they came
from, they said,
in the United States, the
emphasis on being
a good athlete was much more
important in
the United States than back with
their peer
groups in their home country.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: There is a
bright spot when
it comes to this year's PISA
test results.
The gap between rich and poor
students in
the U.S. is closing faster than
any other
developed country, but it will
take a lot
more effort to reach the top.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week,
I'm Kavitha Cardoza, reporting
from Bethesda,
Maryland.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Most of the
attention around
the big biomedical bill signed
by President
Obama today has focused on
faster drug approval
and new money for research, but
it's a huge
piece of legislation.
And one key part that's received
less attention
is the attempt to improve mental
health care
in the U.S.
William Brangham has a look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Advocates say
this part
of the legislation is the most
significant
step forward for mental health
care in nearly
a decade.
The law promotes a range of
mental health
initiatives, including more
evidence-based
early intervention for young
people.
It expands outpatient mental
health care.
And to coordinate it all, it
creates a new
assistant secretary position.
For more on this, I'm joined now
by the lead
author of the legislation,
Congressman Tim
Murphy, Republican of
Pennsylvania.
He's also a practicing
psychologist.
Welcome.
REP.
TIM MURPHY (R), Pennsylvania:
Great to be
with you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Before we get
into the specifics
of the legislation, I wonder if
you could
just give me an overview of what
you see where
we are failing in our treatment
of mental
health care in this country.
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Well, in any given
year, 60 million
Americans are affected by some
level of mental
illness, from the very mild to
the very serious,
10 million with very serious
mental illness.
Four million get no treatment at
all.
States spend an enormous amount
of money,
in the federal government about
$130 billion
spread across 112 agencies,
although most
of that is just disability
payments.
And we're not doing a good job,
because what
has happened is, over the years,
when we have
seen a dropping of death rates
for cancer,
it's gone down, diabetes,
infectious disease,
lung disease, AIDS, all
declined, increasing
for suicide, increasing for
substance abuse.
And when we closed all those big
asylums,
those big hospitals that were
out there for
a century or so -- we needed to
close them
down -- but we didn't provide
outpatient care.
So what do we do?
We have filled our jails with
them.
The majority of people in jails,
the state
and local jails, are people with
a mental
illness disorder, too.
Eight out of 10 people in an
emergency room
have some related mental health
disorder.
Five percent of the people on
Medicaid are
responsible for 50 percent of
all Medicaid
spending.
And those are people with a
concurrent mental
illness.
So, you see, in terms of costs,
in terms of
the costs of lives, 959 a day,
350,000 in
this country last year, related
to mental
illness, primary, secondary,
that's more deaths
in one year than the entire
combat deaths
of World War I -- of the United
States in
World War I, Korea, Vietnam,
Bosnia, Desert
Storm, Afghanistan, and Iraq, in
one year.
It's a serious problem.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Really some
startling numbers
there.
So, let's talk about some of the
specifics.
You create an assistant
secretary for mental
health and substance use
disorders.
I know that is something that
was very important
to you.
Why that?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Because we needed
someone to take
the helm.
What we found in the GAO,
General Accounting
Office, reports, they said there
was no accountability
for the grant programs.
And, oftentimes, we were funding
really embarrassing
silly grant programs, such as a
Web site that
had a special hot line you could
call if you
were upset about the snow in New
England,
if you had snow anxiety, how to
make a fruit
smoothie if you were upset,
making collages,
masks, interpretive dancing, a
$20,000 painting
hanging in someone's office
about mental health
with two people sitting on a
rock.
Total waste of money.
We had to put someone in charge
who can take
the helm of these 112 federal
agencies, work
with them, with the VA, with
DOD, and others,
and start to coordinate
evidence-based care
directed towards those who need
it, work on
prevention, work on those with
serious mental
illness, but someone with the
clout behind
their name to do that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things we often
hear about is there are simply
not enough
beds for people who need them
and not enough
practitioners to help those who
need help.
What does this legislation do to
address that?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Well, regard to the
practitioners,
half the counties in America
have no psychiatrist,
no psychologist.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Half?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Half -- and no
clinical social
worker.
And of those that do have
psychiatrists, but
we have 9,000 child and
adolescent psychiatrists.
We need 30,000.
And, by the way, serious mental
illness, half
the cases emerge by age 14, 75
percent by
age 24.
But you can't get care.
It's not there.
So, we invest about $50 million
to help with
the new work force to build that
up.
And in the bed issue, we also
work with Medicaid
that, right now, they had a
16-bed limit,
which is absurd.
If you're between the ages of 22
and 64, you
can't any in a private
psychiatric hospital
that has more than 16 beds.
That's not enough.
So, we make them homeless or we
put them in
jail.
So, this lists that and says
15-day average
length of stay per month.
That's not enough, I know.
It's not going to address
everything.
But it sure is better to be in a
hospital
bed than laying on a park bench
in the cold
or being in a jail cell.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just as you
mentioned, obviously,
one of the first-responders that
often are
interacting with people who have
mental health
crises are our police forces all
over the
country.
And they're not really
well-equipped to deal
with this.
Do you tackle that in this
legislation?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: We do.
We put a few million dollars
into that.
It's called crisis intervention
training.
I think, two years ago, The
Washington Post
did a story and reported there
was 250 deaths
from police encountering someone
with a mental
illness who then attacked the
policeman, came
in with a knife or a gun or
something.
And that's too many.
What we do is fund the programs,
which are
very, very effective in training
policemen
when they know someone has a
serious mental
illness or they're in crisis or
they can kind
of identify from the situation.
They learn techniques to calm
the person down,
and so that it's not a
confrontation, and
it will save some lives, and get
the person
in treatment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You have
supported repealing
the Affordable Care Act.
And some of your Democratic
colleagues, who
laud this legislation, say that,
if you repeal
the ACA, which has a lot of
provisions to
care for the mentally ill, that
you're shooting
your legislation in the foot.
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What's your
response to
that?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Well, I fought too
hard for this.
I have worked in this field for
40 years.
I welcome the teamwork of my
colleagues on
the other side of the aisle to
say we have
to make sure we preserve this.
The reason it's so important is,
if we're
going to find cost savings in
retooling and
reforming health care, a lot of
it comes from
the integrated care of the
mentally ill, with
mental illness, behavioral
illness, and physical
illness.
When you find someone with a
chronic illness,
they're twice the rate of
depression among
them.
And untreated depression doubles
their health
care costs.
When you hone in and treat both
at the same
time by integrating behavioral
and physical
medicine, when the physician
takes charge,
when you have capitated plans,
so it's incentive
for the doctors to do all that,
you actually
can reduce spending for those
people by about
40 percent to 50 percent, while
you're providing
better care.
So, this is a lesson I want to
make sure my
colleagues to know.
This is the thing what we ought
to be doing.
It's good with compassion.
It's good morally.
And it saves money.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But do you
worry that if
the ACA is repealed, that a lot
of what you're
trying to do, lauded work here,
is going to
get thrown out?
REP.
TIM MURPHY: You're talking to
someone who
has spent the last four years in
the trenches
fighting for this, and a lot of
members who
were part of this team, too.
I don't see us just throwing
this out.
We will work together to make
sure these provisions
stay in.
And even so, part of that
concern is what
states are going to do with
Medicaid money,
with block grants.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
REP.
TIM MURPHY: When states got
block grants,
you saw a number of states, like
Rhode Island
and Ohio, they just pulled the
money out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right.
Representative Tim Murphy of
Pennsylvania,
thank you very much.
REP.
TIM MURPHY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: freeing
yourself to appreciate
art in all its forms and colors.
That's the focus of our latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
And for that, we go to Jeffrey
Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do we see
when we look
at art?
Something that gives us pleasure
or moves
us not at all.
Many of us perhaps aren't sure
what it is
we're supposed to be taking in
or trying to
understand.
The painter David Salle wants us
to trust
ourselves more in looking, but
also to consider
how something is made, as well
as what it
is.
His new book is titled "How to
See."
DAVID SALLE, Author, "How to
See": I think
it enhances one's enjoyment, if
you can put
yourself a little bit into the
place of the
maker, imagine how it was made,
imagine what's
involved in making it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because it is a
thing that
was made, right?
DAVID SALLE: Art is something
someone made.
It's a product of human
endeavor.
As such, it's not that different
from having
a conversation with someone.
The painter is telling us
something.
Just, how do they -- what's
their syntax?
What's their inflection?
JEFFREY BROWN: Which, in
painterly terms,
means what brush you use,
what...
DAVID SALLE: It can be.
Can be how wide the brush is, or
how skinny
the rectangle is, or if it's
even a painting
at all, if it has any marks on
it at all.
JEFFREY BROWN: Salle himself has
been a prominent
artist since the 1980s, known
for his large-scale
collage-style paintings that
incorporate disparate
images from a variety of
sources.
Some newer ones hung in his
Brooklyn studio,
where we talked recently.
One way to look at a painting is
to notice
those images, here a car, a
watermelon, a
cigarette pack, and more.
But how you make these
connections is what
most interests Salle.
DAVID SALLE: What this painting
does, and
most paintings do, is gives you
a path for
your eye to move around.
The painting actually tells your
eye, go here,
now go here, now go here, go
here.
So all you have to do is look at
it, give
it a few seconds, and your eye
will start
to move through the painting.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his book of
essays, Salle
offers an artist's view of other
artists,
Georg Baselitz, Dana Schutz,
John Baldessari,
and many others, and the
decisions they made,
the paths they chose, the
reasons a painting
works or doesn't, as with a
favorite and friend
of his, Alex Katz.
DAVID SALLE: Big brush or small
brush?
I mean, in Alex's case, a really
big brush,
a really big brush moved with
some velocity,
using his whole arm, across a
pretty big surface,
ending in a very fine point,
doing that in
a way which seems both
premeditated and also
free and spontaneous.
That's what you see.
And then your brain translates
that into Maine
Woods.
Oh, I like that place.
I want to go back there.
But what enables you to have
that sensation
is the physical act of painting.
JEFFREY BROWN: You talk about
the artist Christopher
Wool.
So, that's an abstract painting.
I don't quite know what I'm
looking at in
that sense, or at least it's not
recognizable.
DAVID SALLE: Right.
So, in the example of
Christopher Wool, the
not quite knowing what you're
looking at is
part of the experience.
His paintings are made with such
a complicated,
impacted and self-referential
set of gestures,
marks and mechanical
representations of gestures
and marks and their interaction.
It's very hard to tease them
apart.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's what you
mean by the
how in a case like that, all
those kinds of
decisions?
DAVID SALLE: Yes.
Yes.
The how is also the scale, the
size, the color.
The -- all of the physical
characteristics
of the thing are the how.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then one more
example would
be Malcolm Morley, right, in...
DAVID SALLE: Right.
So, Malcolm paints -- typically
paints paintings
of models, thousands of densely
packed brush
strokes made with a very small
brush, intensely
concentrated over small areas of
the canvas,
one after the other.
So, this agitated, densely
packed surface
is the how, which becomes the
what.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're a painter,
so you go
look at these things and say,
oh, how did
he do this, how did she do that?
Do I have to know the how?
Do I have to know how it was
done?
DAVID SALLE: I don't think you
have to know
anything, really.
But I think if you look for more
than 10 seconds,
you will start to -- without
being told anything,
you will start to notice those
things.
You will notice.
If you go to a concert, you will
notice, is
it loud?
Is the music fast?
Is it predominately strings or
brass?
There are things we can all
register, whether
we are musicians or not.
Painting's no different.
Taking pleasure in projecting
oneself into
the painting is the act of
looking.
That's what looking is.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write at one
point, it's
a mistake to ask a work of art
to be all things
to all people.
What can we ask of a work of
art?
What should we ask of it?
DAVID SALLE: I think a good
painting or a
good work of art does many
things it wants,
I mean, maybe 15 or 20 or 100.
One of the things a painting
does is to make
the room look better.
It improves the wall that it's
on.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, nothing
wrong with that.
DAVID SALLE: Which is much
harder than it
looks.
And that's a good thing.
And if one engages with a
painting on that
level, that's fine, that's
great.
After some time, familiarity,
the other things
that a painting does, the other
layers, they
just start to make themselves
felt.
People are still making
paintings.
People are still enjoying
paintings, looking
at paintings.
Paintings still have something
to tell us.
There's a way of being in the
world that painting
brings to us, that painters
bring to the task
that we absorb and are able to
be in dialogue
with.
That's something that's part of
us.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Brooklyn,
New York, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's wonderful to
hear what
an artist thinks art is, for a
change.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
Yes, because we always wonder,
what was the
painter thinking?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
Well, on the "NewsHour" online
right now:
How vital is the president's
daily intelligence
briefing?
The president-elect has taken an
unprecedented
approach, ignoring the briefing
most days
altogether.
So how do national security and
intelligence
experts see this move?
We explore that on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.